docs: add docs for schema auto-discovery (#14065)
apache/druid: docs/ingestion/schema-design.md

Tips for modeling log data in Druid:

> * If you don't know ahead of time what columns you'll want to ingest, you can have Druid perform [schema auto-discovery](#schema-auto-discovery-for-dimensions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you don't know ahead of time what columns to ingest, you can have Druid perform [schema auto-discovery](#schema-auto-discovery-for-dimensions).
```

]
```

### Schema auto-discovery for dimensions

Druid can infer the schema for your data in one of two ways:

> - [Type-aware schema discovery (experimental)](#type-aware-schema-discovery-experimental) where Druid infers the schema and type for your data. Type-aware schema discovery is experimental currently available for native batch and streaming ingestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Type-aware schema discovery (experimental)](#type-aware-schema-discovery-experimental) where Druid infers the schema and type for your data. Type-aware schema discovery is an experimental feature currently available for native batch and streaming ingestion.
```

> - [Type-aware schema discovery (experimental)](#type-aware-schema-discovery-experimental) where Druid infers the schema and type for your data. Type-aware schema discovery is experimental currently available for native batch and streaming ingestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Type-aware schema discovery (experimental)](#type-aware-schema-discovery-experimental) where Druid infers the schema and type for your data. Type-aware schema discovery is an experimental feature currently available for native batch and streaming ingestion.
```

- [String-based schema discovery](#string-based-schema-discovery) where all the discovered columns are typed as either native string or multi-value string columns.

> #### Type-aware schema discovery (experimental)

Reviewer 2: I think it is better not to put `(experimental)` in the heading itself as later, when we remove it we will have to remember to add a redirect. Better to just mention it in the warning text below

Author: ```suggestion
#### Type-aware schema discovery
```

> > Note that using type-aware schema discovery can impact downstream BI tools depending on how they handle ARRAY typed columns..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note that using type-aware schema discovery can impact downstream BI tools depending on how they handle ARRAY typed columns.
```

You can have Druid infer the schema and types for your data partially or fully by setting `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true` and defining some or no dimensions in the dimensions list. 

When performing type-aware schema discovery, Druid can discover all of the columns of your input data (that aren't in the exclusion list), but the behavior depends on the source data:

> - For primitive types, Druid ingests them as the most appropriate native Druid type, either string, double or long. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Primitive types**: Druid ingests them as the most appropriate native Druid type, either string, double or long. 
```

> - For primitive types, Druid ingests them as the most appropriate native Druid type, either string, double or long. 

Reviewer: Consider formatting this list differently. For example:

```suggestion
- **Primitive types**: Ingested as the most appropriate native Druid type, either string, double or long. 
- **Native boolean types**:  Ingested as strings or longs depending on the value of `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans`.
```

> - For input formats with native boolean types will be ingested as strings or longs depending on the value of `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For input formats with native boolean types, Druid ingests them as strings or longs depending on the value of `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans`.
```

- For arrays, the data gets ingested as an array typed column: `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<DOUBLE>`, or `ARRAY<LONG>`. You can then interact with these columns using ARRAY functions as well as UNNEST.
- For mixed types, complex nested structures, and arrays of complex nested structures, Druid ingests the column as the least restrictive data type.

If you're already using string-based schema discovery and want to migrate, see [Migrating to type-aware schema discovery](#migrating-to-type-aware-schema-discovery).

#### String-based schema discovery

If you do not set `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true`, Druid can still use the string-based schema discovery for ingestion if any of the following conditions are met: 

- The dimension list is empty 
- You set `includeAllDimensions` to `true` 

Druid coerces primitives and arrays of primitive types into the native Druid string type. Nested data structures and arrays of nested data structures are ignored and not ingested.

#### Migrating to type-aware schema discovery

> If you previously used string-based schema discovery and want to migrate to type-aware schema discovery, you'll need to do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you previously used string-based schema discovery and want to migrate to type-aware schema discovery, do the following:
```

> - Update any queries that use multi-value dimensions (MVDs) to use UNNEST in conjunction with other functions so that no  MVD behavior is being relied upon. Type-aware schema discovery generates ARRAY typed columns instead of MVDs, so queries that use any MVD features will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update any queries that use multi-value dimensions (MVDs) to use UNNEST in conjunction with other functions so that no MVD behavior is being relied upon. Type-aware schema discovery generates ARRAY typed columns instead of MVDs, so queries that use any MVD features will fail.
```

- Be aware of mixed typed inputs and test how type-aware schema discovery handles them. Druid attempts to cast them as the least restrictive type.

> - If you notice issues with numeric types, you may need to explicitly cast them. Generally though, Druid will handle the coercion for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you notice issues with numeric types, you may need to explicitly cast them. Generally, Druid handles the coercion for you.
```

> - Update your dimension exclusion list and add any nested columns if you want to continue to exclude them. String-based schema discovery automatically ignored nested columns, but type-aware schema discovery will ingest them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update your dimension exclusion list and add any nested columns if you want to continue to exclude them. String-based schema discovery automatically ignores nested columns, but type-aware schema discovery will ingest them.
```

]
```

### Schema auto-discovery for dimensions

Druid can infer the schema for your data in one of two ways:

- [Type-aware schema discovery (experimental)](#type-aware-schema-discovery-experimental) where Druid infers the schema and type for your data. Type-aware schema discovery is an experimental feature currently available for native batch and streaming ingestion.
- [String-based schema discovery](#string-based-schema-discovery) where all the discovered columns are typed as either native string or multi-value string columns.

#### Type-aware schema discovery

> Note that using type-aware schema discovery can impact downstream BI tools depending on how they handle ARRAY typed columns.

You can have Druid infer the schema and types for your data partially or fully by setting `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true` and defining some or no dimensions in the dimensions list. 

> When performing type-aware schema discovery, Druid can discover all of the columns of your input data (that aren't in the exclusion list), but the behavior depends on the source data:
> 
> - **Primitive types**: Ingested as the most appropriate native Druid type, either string, double or long. 
> - **Native boolean types**:  Ingested as strings or longs depending on the value of `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans`.
> - For input formats with native boolean types, Druid ingests them as strings or longs depending on the value of `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans`.
> - For arrays, the data gets ingested as an array typed column: `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<DOUBLE>`, or `ARRAY<LONG>`. You can then interact with these columns using ARRAY functions as well as UNNEST.
> - For mixed types, complex nested structures, and arrays of complex nested structures, Druid ingests the column as the least restrictive data type.

Reviewer 3: tried to clarify behavior a bit:

```suggestion
When performing type-aware schema discovery, Druid can discover all of the columns of your input data (that aren't in
the exclusion list). Druid automatically chooses the most appropriate native Druid type among `STRING`, `LONG`,
`DOUBLE`, `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<LONG>`, `ARRAY<DOUBLE>`, or `COMPLEX<json>` for nested data. For input formats with
native boolean types, Druid ingests these values as strings if `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans` is set to `false`
(the default), or longs if set to `true` (for more SQL compatible behavior). Array typed columns can be queried using
the [array functions](../querying/sql-array-functions.md) or [`UNNEST`](../querying/sql-functions.md#unnest). Nested
columns can be queried with the [json functions](../querying/sql-json-functions.md).

Mixed type columns are stored in the 'least' restrictive type that can represent all values in the column. For example,
mixed numeric columns are `DOUBLE`, if there are any strings present then the column is a `STRING`, if there are arrays
then the column becomes an array with the least restrictive element type, and finally any nested data or arrays of
nested data will be stored as `COMPLEX<json>` nested columns.
```

]
```

### Schema auto-discovery for dimensions

You can have Druid infer the schema for your data partially or fully by setting `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true` and defining some or no dimensions in the dimensions list. For any dimensions that aren't a uniform type, Druid ingests them as JSON.

> If you do not set `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true` but do set `includeAllDimensions` to `true` with an empty dimensions list, Druid will ingest all columns as strings.

Reviewer 3: Druid will also do the older string based schema discovery by just leaving the dimensions list empty. `includeAllDimensions` allows the string based mode to _also_ work with partial schema declaration, otherwise the only way to enable this mode is with an empty dimension list (and not setting the new `useSchemaDiscovery` to true)

]
```

### Schema auto-discovery for dimensions

You can have Druid infer the schema for your data partially or fully by setting `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true` and defining some or no dimensions in the dimensions list. For any dimensions that aren't a uniform type, Druid ingests them as JSON.

If you do not set `dimensionsSpec.useSchemaDiscovery` to `true`, Druid can still use the string-based schemaless ingestion if either of the following conditions are met: 

- The dimension list is empty 
- You set `includeAllDimensions` to `true` 

> 

Reviewer 3: While we have these two modes, I think it is worth more clearly describing them, the differences between them particularly with regards to multi-value dimensions and array types, and call out that there currently isn't an effortless migration path between the two modes.

We should probably give them semi-official names, I recommend "string-based schema discovery" and "type-aware schema discovery".

For string-based schema discovery, the important parts are that all columns it discovers will be either native single or multi-value `STRING`. It will only discover primitive and arrays of primitive types, and coerce them in both cases to native Druid `STRING` types. Anything that is a nested data structure, or arrays of nested data structures, like JSON objects or whatever, will be ignored and not ingested.

For type-aware schema discovery, it will discover primitive types and preserve them as the most appropriate native Druid type: `STRING`, `DOUBLE`, or `LONG`. Input formats with native boolean types will be ingested as `STRING` or `LONG` depending on the value of `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans`. Some formats have specific coercion rules for things like enums and other special types, which typically will be coerced to a `STRING`, but this is determined by the input format, not schema discovery, and is consistent with however `flattenSpec` handles these types (i'm not sure that this necessarily needs called out, since how these types of values are coerced is dependent on the underlying format).

For type-aware mode, arrays of primitives in the input data will be ingested as native `ARRAY` typed columns, `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<DOUBLE>`, or `ARRAY<LONG>`. These have `ARRAY` semantics in SQL and native queries, so are typically interacted with using the array functions (`ARRAY_` prefix) and/or `UNNEST`, in contrast with multi-value strings which can be queried using either `VARCHAR` or `ARRAY` semantics (the latter using the `MV_` functions) and have an implicit unnest, but only when grouping.

Type-aware schema discovery also will ingest mixed type input, complex nested structures, and arrays of complex nested structures as `COMPLEX<json>` as a sort of catch-all. This means that unlike string-based schema discovery, type-aware schema discovery will find _all_ of the columns in the input data.

The migration path we are planning between these two modes is not effortless. The biggest differences are the new mode using ARRAY types instead of MVDs, but also any mixed typed inputs might now be ingested as `COMPLEX<json>` instead of coerce to strings, which will prevent grouping (for now... this is going to change in the future). Numeric types, I think shouldn't cause too much trouble since Druid should try best effort to coerce the values as needed to successfully complete the query, but the SQL schema will change to start validating these values as numeric, so might need the occasional explicit cast.

The current plan for the approach on migrating MVDs is that queries should be migrated to explicitly start using `UNNEST`, to ensure that no implicit multi-value behavior is being relied on in the query. We plan to introduce a config flag(s?) that require MVDs be handled explicitly as ARRAY types to ensure that all queries have been migrated to help with this, but haven't added such a flag for this release. Once the queries are migrated, then the new type-aware schema discovery mode can be enabled (after ensuring that any dimension exclusion lists are updated to include nested columns which previously would not have been automatically discovered, should they wish to continue excluding them). Alternatively, the new type-aware schema discovery mode can be enabled, but with explicitly defined 'string' dimensions for known MVDs or mixed type inputs which should continue to be ingested as MVDs until all of the queries can be migrated to using explicit UNNEST and/or `ARRAY_` functions.

Its also worth calling out that the new type-aware schema discovery mode is experimental. I imagine it is likely we will remove the string-based schema discovery mode once the type-aware mode has matured, but until then we should clearly distinguish them.

Reviewer 3: >We plan to introduce a config flag(s?) that require MVDs be handled explicitly as ARRAY types to ensure that all queries have been migrated to help with this, but haven't added such a flag for this release.

btw, leave this part out of the docs until/if we actually add such a thing

Author: Latest commit (6d5c97a) has changes based on the info
